Marketing budgets aren't shrinking,
they're shifting faster than most teams
can keep up with. I just analyzed
spending data from 9,210
marketers, [music]
and the patterns reveal something
critical. AISO investment dropped 98%.
Influencer marketing grew 78%. While
organic social budgets dropped 64%. I'm
Neil Patel. I run NP Digital, one of the
world's largest independent marketing
agencies, managing over a billion
dollars in marketing spend for brands
worldwide. In this video, I'll teach you
how to read these budget signals so you
know exactly where to move your dollars,
which channels to double down on, and
which ones to cut before they drain your
ROI. So that way, you can reallocate
smarter and faster than your
competition. Here's what you need to
know. Chapter one, budget concentration
beats budget diversification.
Spreading your budgets across every
channel feels safe, but the data proves
it's the fastest way to lose competitive
ground in 2026. Here's what's really
happening. We analyzed 9,210 responses.
[music]
We found that 61% of B2B marketers are
increasing their overall spend this
year. B TOC marketers, 57% are
increasing. The ones who aren't
increasing, majority are either holding
and less of them are decreasing. [music]
So, in other words, people are either
increasing their budgets or keeping them
the same, but the majority are
increasing. And [music] here's the
thing, even the teams with growing
budgets are cutting specific channels
aggressively. This creates a reality
that contradicts [music] conventional
wisdom. The phrase follow the money
doesn't just mean watch where budgets
are growing. It means watch where
confident, high-erforming teams are
consolidating dollars away from low
signal channels and into [music] high
intent environments. In my opinion, the
gap between using AI and getting results
from AI is [music] where most marketing
budgets are being wasted. Right now, the
teams are experimenting everywhere
instead of doubling down on what's
actually compounding. Here's exactly how
to use this insight. Before you allocate
a single dollar, ask yourself, is this
channel giving me clearer intent signals
than it did last year? If the answer is
no, that's your cut list. If the answer
is yes, that's where you concentrate
firepower. Chapter two, organic social
becomes entertainment media, and most
brands aren't ready.
Organic social isn't dying because
algorithms change. It's [music]
separating winners from losers because
it demands content creation skills. most
brands don't have yet. Let me show you
exactly what's happening. Organic social
budgets are facing the steepest pullback
[music] in our entire data set. 64% of
marketers are pulling back and
decreasing. Only 32% are increasing and
just [music] 4% are holding flat. But
here's what's really going on. Social
media became the new TV and most brands
are still treating it like a bulletin
[music] board. The platforms didn't stop
working. Most brands just don't have the
skills to compete anymore. Think about
what's happened. Social [music]
platforms transform from follower-based
networks into interestbased media. You
no longer are competing against other
brands in your niche. You are competing
against the most entertaining and
valuable content on the internet.
[music] That requires a completely
different skill set. You need scripting
and storytelling ability, video
production, [music]
literacy, format creation, show series,
repeatable angles, entertainment value
alongside educational value, and
personality and presence on camera.
[music] Most marketing teams weren't
hired for this. They were hired to write
copy, manage campaigns, [music]
and coordinate promotions. Now, they're
expected to produce entertainment level
content, and they're getting crushed by
creators who spent years mastering these
skills. [music] Social media isn't just
a proof layer where people validate you
after discovering you elsewhere. It's a
primary discovery channel. In a 2025
Horitz research study, 50% of consumers
said social media is now a primary way
they learn about new brands and
products. And Sprouto's 2025 poll survey
found that 37% of consumers prefer going
to social first when [music] searching
for product reviews and recommendation.
So here's the reality. Social isn't
dying. It's just exposing who can
actually create content with watching.
[music] Even if you can't produce that
content yourself, the channel still
works. Just [music] partner with
creators. In fact, 69% of marketers are
increasing influencer spend this year
because [music] it's the fastest way to
get trusted creative you can scale
through paid. The brands cutting budgets
aren't wrong. They're just prioritizing
what's working for them now. That
creates a gap competitors can exploit by
finding new ways to tap into the same
discovery power. Chapter three, intent
precision just became more valuable than
[music] broad reach. The biggest budget
shift isn't from one channel to another.
It's from broad reach to precise intent
and the channels absorbing that capital
reveal exactly where buyer behavior
already moved. Let's break down what's
actually winning right now. AI SEO
investment jumped 98%. The single
biggest growth area in our entire study.
The reason is simple. Zeroclick searches
and AO reviews completely change how
visibility works. You're no longer
optimizing for a click. You're
optimizing to be cited as authoritative
[music] source inside an answer itself.
At the same time, influencer marketing
is growing at 78% with 69% of marketers
increasing spend. This isn't about
Instagram sponsorships [music] anymore.
Brands are betting that trustd driven
traffic, direct word of mouth, and
creator will convert better than cold
paid clicks. Influencers create brand
awareness and social proof earlier in
the journey. [music]
Exactly where attribution has gotten
harder to track. Here's the strategic
connection between these [music] two
trends. They're solving the same
problem. Traditional advertising relied
on interruptive [music] reach. You
showed up where attention already
existed and borrowed it. But today's
buyer journey is nonlinear. People
discovered through AI tools validate
through trusted [music] voices and
convert when firstparty data lets you
sequence the right message at the right
time. The proof is a sustained
investment. Paid search, email, and CRO
are still important, but the way those
dollars worked has changed. You're not
buying [music] attention. You're buying
intent at the moment it's ready to
convert. Here's how to use this. Audit
where your attribution is actually
coming from, not where your dashboard
says [music] it's coming from. Then
relocate into the channels that
influence decisions, not [music] just
the ones that get the last click credit.
And if you're struggling to measure your
attribution, check us out at NP Digital,
where we have a data and analytics team
that can do this all for you. Plus, we
can even run your campaigns in 2026 and
beyond. Chapter 4. Measurability became
the new competitive mode. Third party
signals keep degrading. So budgets are
consolidating into channels that stay
measurable and that's creating a massive
competitive advantage for teams who
understand the strategic value of
clarity. Here's a pattern driving
reallocation decisions. Paid [music]
search, email, and CRO all offer clearer
attribution than emerging channels. In
uncertain conditions, that clarity
becomes currency. When you can't prove
ROI everywhere, you can protect budget
in places [music] where you can. But
there's a more sophisticated move
happening beneath the surface. The best
performing teams aren't [music] just
defending measurable channels. They're
using firstparty data to make every
channel more measurable. That's why
email and life cycle budgets are holding
resilient. 60% are keeping spend flat.
23% are increasing. First party data
enables consistent message delivery when
paid reach and signal quality decline.
[music] This is also why CRO and UX
remain a priority. 52% are increasing
spend. When traffic is harder to earn
and easier to lose, you optimize for
what you have. [music] Fewer clicks
means you need to squeeze more revenue
out of each and every single visit.
Here's the strategic bet high performing
teams are making. Customer acquisition
isn't the only scalable lever anymore.
Retention is [music] the controllable
one. Retention programs stabilize
margins as media costs rise, auctions
[music] tighten, and platforms stay
volatile. Now, this is your exact move.
Take 10 [music] to 15% of your marketing
budget and set it aside for testing new
channels and tactics. Measure everything
else ruthlessly. Speed of reallocation
beats perfection and prediction. The
teams that can shift budget midcarter
based on real performance signals are
capturing structural [music] advantage
while competitors stay locked into
annual budgets that no longer reflect
reality. Chapter 5. The four-part
framework for defensible budget
allocation. Budget decisions in 2026
aren't about chasing trends. They are
about matching investment to where
performance can be proven and defended.
And that requires a decision-making
framework built on evidence, not
aspiration. Let me give you the
four-part system we use at NP Digital
when deciding where client dollars go.
First, anchor spend proven demand.
Protect budgets tied directly to revenue
and high [music] intent activity. These
are your foundation channels: paid
search, email, CRO, SEO. If you can't
defend budget here with clear ROI data,
you've got bigger problems than
allocation. Second, build flexibility
around performance signals. Shift
dollars based on real outcomes. Don't
lock yourself into annual commitments
for channels that aren't delivering. Set
aside 10 to 15% of budgets for
experimentation without destabilizing
what works. [music] Test intentionally
without gambling on unproven tactics.
Third, separate experimentation from
core investment. The most expensive
mistake teams make is treating every new
channel like it deserves an equal
budget. It doesn't. New channels earn
budget by proving incrementally, not by
being trendy. AI, SEO, influencer
marketing, community building, these
should start small and scale based on
results, not hype. Fourth, reallocate
faster than your competitors. Speed of
adjustment becomes a competitive
advantage in volatile conditions. The
teams winning in 2026 are reviewing
performance monthly and moving budget
mid-carter when signals change. They're
not waiting for annual planning cycles
[music] to catch up to market reality.
Here's why this framework works. It's
built on defensibility, not aspiration.
You're not [music] guessing where the
market is going. You're following where
proven performance already exists, then
expanding carefully into related
channels that show early traction. The
clear patterns here, marketers are
putting more money into channels that
drive conversions and retention and
pulling back from traditional ads that
just aren't performing like they used
to. And instead of posting more content,
they're focusing on fewer pieces that
hit harder. So now think how you're
investing your marketing dollars.
Compare it against the patterns we just
walked through [music] and ask yourself
these three questions. One, are you
anchored in channels where attribution
is clear and ROI is defensible? If more
than 30% of your budget is in channels
you can't measure confidently, that's a
red flag. Two, are you investing in
channels where intent signals are
getting stronger or weaker? AI, SEO,
influencer, email, Sierro, they're all
absorbing dollars because intent is
clearly improving. Organic social and
traditional display are losing ground
because signals are degrading. Three,
can you reallocate budget mid-carter
based on performance? Or are you locked
into annual commitments that assume
market conditions won't change? The
businesses that win in today's
marketplace will be faster, not just
bigger. Budgets are consolidating around
fewer, higher [music] confidence
channels. Efficiency and retention now
matter as much as acquisition. And AI is
reshaping how value gets captured, not
just how work gets done. If you want to
go deeper into how online marketing is
evolving and AI technology is reshaping
the next wave of traffic, watch one of
these videos next.